Master document for (interactive) website/ virtual exhibition
[List Paragraph] Black background
[List Paragraph] White letters (font/ tapeface: times new roman)
[List Paragraph] Swiping down to the next “page”
[List Paragraph] 
[List Paragraph] Title page
Title: 
The extractive logic of AI
The tension between artificial intelligence and the environment 
Small information with an I in the up-right corner:
This project is a critical reflection of AI and its impact on the environment and the climate. It is not complete nor does it explain in detail how AI works. It is mere a try of showing a part of the extractive logic of AI. It focuses on the material aspects behind AI and its extraction force. However, the current technological development is also involved in exploitation of people and data. If you are interested in these further aspects, I recommend “Atlas of AI: Power, Politics, and the Planetary Costs of Artificial Intelligence” from Kate Crawford, the main source of this website. As it is an US-American literature, my project is suited as well from a western perspective, which tries to integrate the perspective of other countries and places around the world. I mostly used the German translation from 2024 of Crawford’s book, except for quotes. But as the original book is from 2021, most of the numbers are dated at that time as well.  
[List Paragraph] 
[List Paragraph] AI 
[List Paragraph] Five boxes with titles to click on to get the information text
Five boxes with information:
[List Paragraph] What is artificial intelligence?
In the mid-20th century, the field of AI started to formulate and replicate the human intelligence. Intelligence was seen as something free of social, cultural, historical and political power relations. However, it is impossible to consider the human mind without the bodily and social aspects of humans. It is therefore hard to translate the inexplicit functions of the brain into precise formulation of processes and data. Furthermore, the history of AI is not merely a technical development but also a cultural project in which machines were endowed with human characterises, all the while astonishing uncritical accepting and reflecting the black-box processes, the data consumption and our own understanding of intelligence. So, Kate Crawford says: 
“AI is neither artificial nor intelligent. Rather, artificial intelligence is both embodied and material, made from natural resources, fuel, human labor, infrastructures, logistics, histories, and classifications. AI systems are not autonomous, rational, or able to discern anything without extensive, computationally intensive training with large datasets or predefined rules and rewards. In fact, artificial intelligence as we know it depends entirely on a much wider set of political and social structures. And due to the capital required to build AI at scale and the ways of seeing that it optimizes AI systems are ultimately designed to serve existing dominant interests. In this sense, artificial intelligence is a registry of power.” (Crawford, 2021, 8)
The power of AI arises from an endowment of authority and knowledge through data sharing, social embedding and economic competition as well as intransparency. Thus, enabling AI to be used as a political- economic instrument based on data-extractive infrastructures for the digital capitalism that further stabilize other power structures, such as postcolonial exploitation. As Rainer Mühlhoff states: “Ohne staatliche Regulierung eignet sich diese Machttechnologie ideal für autoritäre oder gar faschistische Zwecke.” [Without state regulation, this technology of power is ideally suited for authoritarian or even fascist purposes.] (Mühlhoff, 2025, 35)
[List Paragraph] How does AI work (non- technical)?
Machine learning today is mostly based on heuristics, a statistical model that makes decisions based on correlations. Since correlation does not imply causation, it is important that the machine be trained on a very large dataset. One system is based on neural networks which are made up of dozens of layers, receive labelled data, are assigned weights and thresholds and thereby classify data. In this process, the data is weighted and categorized by a development team. Thus, decisions of AI systems are based on both similarity functions and human modelling (cf. Zweig, 2023, 28). Further explanations and distinction between machine learning and neural networks can be found on the website from IBM to AI vs. machine-learning vs. deep-learning vs. neural-networks: https://www.ibm.com/de-de/think/topics/ai-vs-machine-learning-vs-deep-learning-vs-neural-networks 
In this project I draw on Kate Crawford definition, as she distinguishes between machine learning – range of technical processes- and artificial intelligence - enormous industrial device linked to politics, labor, culture and capital. So, rather than focusing on the technical aspects of AI which convey an abstract picture, we must recognise the political nature of AI. To understand AI as a political, economic, cultural and scientific force which is shaping knowledge, communication and power, we must ask, what is being optimised, for whom, and who is authorised to make that decision instead of focusing solely on neural networks and statistical pattern recognition (cf. Crawford, 2024, 15, 17f., 28f.).
[List Paragraph] What possibilities does AI have for (environmental) sustainability?
Artificial intelligence and digital technologies offer significant opportunities for improving environmental sustainability, often summarized under the concept of digitainability. Key digital tools such as data analytics, AI-driven optimization, and connected platforms, can help businesses reduce resource use, optimize production processes, and develop more sustainable products and services. These technologies not only increase efficiency (doing things with fewer resources) but also effectiveness (doing the right things for sustainability), enabling entirely new approaches to environmentally responsible business practices. One important area is the development of green technologies and solutions that support a circular economy. 
However, there are also significant challenges. Many businesses, especially small and medium-sized enterprises, lack access to adequate digital infrastructure and are often unaware of available sustainable digital solutions. Even when technologies exist, economic incentives do not always align with environmental goals, creating a persistent tension between profitability and sustainability. Truly sustainable digital solutions, such as energy-efficient software, low-impact data centers, or “Green IT” and “Clean IT” initiatives are still relatively rare. Likewise, digital tools specifically designed to encourage sustainable usage behavior remain largely underdeveloped.
In conclusion, AI has strong potential to support environmental sustainability and accelerate the transition to a circular economy. Yet this potential is not fully realized due to infrastructural gaps, limited awareness, and misaligned incentives (cf. Schmidt, 2023, 8, 40-46).
According to a study from acatech Studie, a scientific project about future issues relating to science and technology policy funded by the ministry of economy and climate protection (BMWK), some policy options could be: to raise awareness of the availability of sustainable digital solutions and counteract the rebound effects of digital technologies (efficiency), to promote the use of digital solutions for the circular economy and strengthen interdisciplinary research into environmental impacts (effectiveness) and to expand CO₂ pricing, establish a monitoring system to measure the environmental impacts of industries and digital solutions and consider digitainability holistically from ecological, social and economic perspectives as well as establish interdisciplinary stakeholder dialogue on digitainability (cf. Schmidt, 2023, 40-46).
Some examples for digitainability are:
Intelligent field robot for sustainable agriculture (use case of the acatech study)
The AI-assisted field robot from the NOcsPS project enables autonomous mechanical weed control without the use of chemical pesticides. The robot is equipped with camera and laser sensors and can distinguish between crop plants and weeds using AI methods. The image data is analysed in real time within the robot. Weed removal without chemical pesticides preserves biodiversity and soil fertility and prevents chemical residues in food. The robot is powered entirely by electricity and renewable energy, meaning that no climate-damaging emissions are produced during operation (cf. Schmidt, 2023, 21).
AI acoustic monitoring for rainforest protection
Deforestation and changes in land use account for more than ten per cent of global greenhouse gas emissions. Trees absorb CO₂ and store it for long periods. When they are felled, much of this carbon dioxide is released back into the atmosphere. To curb illegal deforestation, the non-profit organisation Rainforest Connection attaches acoustic monitoring sensors to trees, which then record the surrounding forest and send the audio signals to a cloud in real time. A machine learning model, trained to recognise sounds such as chainsaws, then analyses this data. If deforestation noises are detected, an alert is sent to the local authorities. If authorities were given the opportunity to use AI tools to limit the destruction of rainforests, vast amounts of emissions could be avoided. More examples of innovative ideas in the field of digitainability can be found in this article of the DW: https://www.dw.com/de/wie-k%C3%BCnstliche-intelligenz-der-umwelt-nutzt/a-65400711 
[List Paragraph] How is AI build on Extractivism and Digital capitalism?
Our work and private life, our medical history, our free time, our conversations and entertainment, our political interest, all these aspects of modern life are relocated in clouds, in an interconnected architecture of computer, without considering the material costs, even though nothing could work without the minerals and resources inside. To fully understand AI is to recognize AI as an instrument of the digital capitalism as well as an extractive industry. The most evident extractive nature of AI is the mining industry with not only the new extractivism of data mining but also the classical mining, which gets strengthen on the way. The tech sector’s demand for rare materials, oil and coal is enormous, but the true costs of extracting these resources are never carried by the industry. The logic of extraction is encountered across the whole planetary system, it is in the steady decline of resources from minerals and water to fossil fuels which gets further reinforced by the violence of war, environmental pollution, extinction and ruthless exploitation (cf. Crawford, 2024, 23f., 38). As the development of models for natural language models and computer vision are extremely energy-intensive, the race to develop even faster and more efficient models has led to an increase in AI’s carbon footprint as well as the continuation to “terraform the planet” (Crawford, 2021, 15). The consequences of terraforming can not only be found in the atmosphere, the oceans, the earth’ crust and its geological history but also seen in the brutal impacts faced by marginalized populations around the world (cf. Crawford, 2024, 36). “To understand it all, we need a panoramic view of the planetary scale of computational extraction” (Crawford, 2021, 28).
[List Paragraph] Why is AI not a “clean technology”?
While minerals are fundamental to the technic behind AI, its driving force is electrical energy. Modern data processing is rarely examined from the perspective of its carbon footprint or fossil fuel use and the associated environmental impact, because its mostly observed abstractly and distant. As backbone of the AI industry, the needed material of a Cloud, like rock, lithium brine and fossil fuel, is bigger than the multilayered technical stack of data modelling, hardware, software and networks. Even though the cloud is a resource-intensive, extractive technology that converts water and electricity into computing power, causing a considerable amount of environmental damage, it pushes these aspects out of our field of vision. The tech industry is crafting a public image of a sustainable technology industry with zero carbon emissions which promotes environmental policies and sustainable initiatives as well as plans to tackle climate change using AI as a tool. However, the operating infrastructures require an enormous amount of energy, and the carbon footprint of AI systems is growing even larger. To improve the performance of AI systems, computational cycles are maximized. However, the use of brute-force testing, the systematic collection of more data and the use of more computational cycles until a better result is achieved, in AI training runs leads to a massive increase in energy consumption. For example, according to estimates by OpenAI, a single AI model requires ten times the computing power per year for training since 2012. This illustrates the trend toward computational maximalism, which has profound ecological implications. Global data processing already emits as much carbon dioxide as the aviation industry did at its peak with even faster rising emissions and data centres being among the world’s largest consumers of electricity. It is therefore clear that the computing power required to create AI models, coupled with the desire for exponential increases in speed and precision, comes at a high cost to the planet. Although the industry is attempting to implement carbon-neutral measures like more energy-efficient data centres or an increase in the use of renewable energy, in most cases, the actions involve purchasing carbon credits rather than pursing a general reduction in emissions, as companies like Apple and Google have done. Most data centres like the ones in China are producing millions of tonnes of CO² by using mostly energy of coal. This omnipresent coal-fired power generation and resource extraction is leaving global implications which transcend all national borders (cf. Crawford, 2024, 38f., 49-52). Thus, the so-called clean technology is not so clean after all. 
Question mark in the right corner:
What does intelligence mean? How do we define it?
What happens when machines train machines? Will decision-making processes then become increasingly less transparent?
How can we make technology more sustainable? Is it even possible to catch up with the development and resources usage?
[List Paragraph] 
[List Paragraph] Globe
[List Paragraph] Globe which you can turn in every direction
[List Paragraph] Information point in the corner with the information of a god-like perspective 
[List Paragraph] question mark with questions 
[List Paragraph] With points to click on which show different places in the world which are relevant for the climate and AI
[List Paragraph] If you click on the point, a small field with information and a picture of the place opens up
[List Paragraph] 
Question mark in the corner:
[List Paragraph] How can this visualisation be deconstructed?
[List Paragraph] What other places are there to consider? 
[List Paragraph] Where are you seeing the extractive logic of AI?
Information point in the corner:
A god-like perspective – AI’s goal of totality
The ambition of the AI industry to map the world in its entirety, capturing people’s movements, communication, and work, reveals a deeper problematic: the pursuit of a “god-like” perspective. This vision suggests a form of total knowledge, in which the world becomes fully measurable, predictable, and controllable. Yet such a perspective is neither neutral nor purely technical. It reflects a colonising impulse that centralises power, determining how reality is defined while obscuring the political decisions embedded in that process (cf. Crawford, 2021, 19f.). This logic is closely tied to the idea of the planetary scale. Viewing the Earth as a totality across space and time creates an epistemic model based on distance and abstraction. A key symbol of this is the Blue Marble photograph, which presents the planet as a unified, borderless object. While often celebrated for fostering global consciousness, such imagery also homogenises and universalises the Earth, stripping away local differences and lived realities (cf. Hanusch, 2021, 26).
Criticism from feminist, postcolonial, and artistic perspectives has long challenged this divine gaze. Because this gaze implies mastery through distance and positioning the observer as all-seeing and objective. However, it reinforces hierarchies: those who control the vantage point like technocrats, institutions, or AI itself, also control the narrative. Contemporary visual technologies, such as drones, extend this logic. Their aesthetic of overview suggests epistemological dominance: to see everything from above is to claim authority over it. Landscapes are framed as passive objects, reinforcing an anthropocentric worldview in which nature becomes a resource to be managed. This mirrors the extractive logic embedded in AI systems, where data is treated as raw material to be mined, processed, and commodified. Ultimately, the problem of the god-like perspective lies in its claim to objectivity and totality. By presenting the world as a static, knowable object, it legitimises systems of control and extraction, whether in colonial cartography or contemporary AI systems. Challenging this requires acknowledging that all knowledge is situated, partial, and political and it becomes necessary to juxtapose multiple perspectives and embrace epistemic plurality (cf. Bergemann, 2010, 17-42). 
Therefore, it’s also important to criticise the method I choose to visualise the aspects of the extractive logic of AI. I still chose to reproduce this overview, because I found that a moving globe can illustrate best the connectiveness between all the places which are behind the abstract picture of AI. But this can and should also get deconstructed. This globe is not complete; it is mere the beginning of following a few places which are embedded in the logic of AI. 
A video of the New York Times with Kate Crawford also clearly illustrates the environmental impact of AI on its own supply chain. But again, the visualisation of the globe can be criticised as well. The link to the video: https://www.nytimes.com/video/opinion/100000010316392/ais-environmental-impact-will-threaten-its-own-supply-chain.html
Further insights are provided by the essay “Zwischen Terminator und Taschenrechner” by Peter Schadt and Luise Schaller. It examines the material and ideological foundations of AI from the tantalum mines in the Congo to the click workers in Kenya all the way to the screens of Silicon Valley. The bibliography can be found at the end of the website.
Text for the different places:
The place to be in the tech-sector
Silicon Valley in the US is the most known place of the whole tech-sector because of its relevance for the global economy and electronic data processing (EDP) infrastructure of the whole world. The headquarters of companies like Apple, Google, Meta and Lockheed Martin are located there. In the 1950s, more and more students and graduates from the university of Stanford began setting up small businesses in the local area. Gradually, new developments and products began to emerge. Today, Silicon Valley is renowned for its high concentration of innovative companies, start-ups, venture capitalists, research institutions and universities working in the fields of information technology, software, the internet, biotechnology, artificial intelligence and more. But it is also a place full of contradictions. A world in which young, talented and idealistic people are trying to shape the future, but also a world in which abuse of power, greed, sexism and surveillance prevail (cf. Handelsblatt, 2023).
 {{IMG:rId76}}
Abb. 1: Headquarters of Apple in the Silicon Valley, US
Between old and new mining technics
In Silver Peak is the oldest mining in Nevada in the US. Historically being of interest because of its reserve of gold and silver, nowadays the focus lays on its gigantic underground lithium lake. Once gold was bringing the wealth to the city, now it’s the “grey gold”, the white lithium crystal. By pumping the lithium sole out of the ground, it gets evaporated in open green glimmer lakes. Mining is only that profitable because it does not cover its real cost like environmental damage, illness and death of workers as its strategically forgets its consequences in regard of the presentation of the technical development. Tech industry became the greater interest. After the market capitalization the five biggest companies opened offices in the city (Apple, Microsoft, Amazon, Meta and Google) and the tech boom brought fancy cars. One the other hand, it created one of the biggest quotes of homelessness and therefore, a big cliff between rich and poor just a few streets apart since the biggest benefits of extraction got incorporated by few (cf. Crawford, 2024, 32-36). So, the question of distance rises again:
“In other words, those who profit from mining do so only because the costs must be sustained by others, those living and those not yet born. It is easy to put a price on precious metals, but what is the exact value of a wilderness, a clean stream, breathable air, the health of local communities?“ (Crawford, 2021, 26)
Not far from the mine in Silver Peak, is the Tesla Gigafactory which is the biggest lithium battery factory in the world. Since Tesla is also the biggest consumer of lithium-ion battery for its cars and home charging stations, it consumes more than 28,000 t of Lithium hydroxide per year which is half of the world’s total demand (as of 2021). So, as Silver Peak is of great interest to the tech sector because of rechargeable batteries, the one who controls the mine, has the control of the national supply in the US. And therefore, holds a lot of power in its hands (cf. Crawford, 2024, 37).
 {{IMG:rId77}}
Abb. 2: Silver Peak mine in Nevada, US
The violent side effects of extractivism
As Bolivia has the biggest lithium reserve of the world, it’s a place of permanent political tension. And since resources are becoming increasingly rare, the extraction of the 17 rare earth elements which is linked to regional and geopolitical violence like war, hunger and death, must be taken even more into account when talking about AI (cf. Crawford, 2024, 41).
 {{IMG:rId78}}
Abb. 3: Lithium reserves concentrated in the Uyuni salt flats, Bolivia
Funding conflicts, destruction and death
The profit generated by extraction is funding conflicts like the one in Congo and therefore the death and the displacement of millions of people. Because of different reasons like corruption there are no thorough checks for conflict-free status in mines, so the conflict as well as the conditions of work are catastrophic and resemble modern-day slavery. Congo is an example of the worst case of destructive extractivism. Even though most minerals don’t come from war zones, there is still human suffering and destroying of environment involved, like untold stories about rivers polluted by acid and depopulated landscapes and the extinction of plant and animal species that were once indispensable to the local ecosystem (cf. Crawford, 2024, 42f.).
 {{IMG:rId79}}
Abb. 4: cobalt and copper mine in Kolwezi, Democractic Republic of Congo
Sinking in the lake of toxic waste
In Batau in Mongolia the Bayan Obo mine which has one of the world’s biggest deposits of rare minerals, created a nine-kilometre big artificial lake made of black toxic sludge from more than 180 million tonnes of waste. Since according to estimates by Chinese Society of Rare Earths, refining one tone of these rare earths produces 75,000 litres of acidic water and one ton of radioactive waste (as of 2021). So, then 95% of rare minerals are coming from China, it is not only because the geological position of Mongolia and China, but also because of their ignorance in regard of the damage of the environment connected to the mining and degradation. The rare electronical, visual and magnetic function of rare minerals cannot yet be replaced with other materials. Therefore, the ratio between the used minerals and the toxic waste stays extremely unbalanced (cf. Crawford, 2024, 44f.).
 {{IMG:rId80}}
Abb. 5: Black sludge pours into the lake in Batau, Mongolia
A landscape of ruins
Indonesia is worldwide second biggest producer of tin after China, with 90% used for semiconductors (as of 2021). On those small Indonesian islands, informal miners sit on makeshift rafts and use bamboo poles to scrape the seabed before diving down to suck up tin from the surface with giant vacuum tubes. They sell what they find to middlemen, who also collect minerals from authorized mines. These middlemen then mix everything together and sell it to companies. This process is not subject to any regulation and is therefore not governed by any formal safeguards for either the workers or the environment (cf. Crawford, 2024, 45).
“As investigative journalist Kate Hodal reports, ‘Tin mining is a lucrative but destructive trade that has scarred the island’s landscape, bulldozed its farms and forests, killed off its fish stocks and coral reefs, and dented tourism to its pretty palm-lined beaches. The damage is best seen from the air, as pockets of lush forest huddle amid huge swaths of barren orange earth. Where not dominated by mines, this is pockmarked with graves, many holding the bodies of miners who have died over the centuries digging for tin.’ The mines are everywhere: in backyards, in the forest, by the side of the road, on the beaches. It is a landscape of ruin.” (Crawford, 2021, 38)
 {{IMG:rId81}}
Abb. 6: A sea tin miner in Bangka, Indonesia
The cost and value of water
The 100,000 square metre big facility in Bluffdale Utah is one of the biggest data center of the US belonging to the National Security Agency (NSA) and therefore, another example of the computerized world, in which water is a true cost. Data centers consume larger amounts of water to cool their processor chips to avoid overheating and potential damage. The water which is used to cool the data centres must be drinkable or distilled water. Otherwise, it could damage the system. It is estimated that U.S. data centers consume 449 million gallons of water per day and 163.7 billion gallons annually (as of 2021). And therefore, threatening freshwater supplies which is valuable for human life (cf. Yañez-Barnuevo, 2025). Furthermore, the history of water use in the United States is marked by conflicts and secret deals, where agreements reached are kept under wraps. Thus, it remains unclear whether the estimated consumption of the NSA data centre of nearly 6.5 million litres of water actually reflects the truth, or whether the figure is significantly higher, with water being sold at rates well below average in exchange for economic growth. Today, the geopolitics of water is deeply intertwined with the mechanisms and policies of data centers, data processing and energy. Since the data centers are as well as the mines usually located far away from urban centres, it’s creating the imagine that the cloud is something abstract and invisible, even though it is something material which influence the environment and the climate in a way that haven’t been fully researched and examined yet. This shows again the distance which is created between imagination and reality (cf. Crawford, 2024, 52f.). 
 {{IMG:rId83}}
Abb. 7: The NSA Data Center in Utah, US
Ecosystem and life cycle of AI
The vast AI ecosystem relies on many forms of extraction: from the collection of data generated by our daily activities to different forms of exploitation of human workforce and natural resources around the world as well as a continuous enormous usage of energy along this cycle. All to build and maintain this massive global network and concentration of economical and geopolitical power of few. To reflect the radical drain of resources which took years to build inside of the world, and the extraction of the world’s geological history which only gets used for a glimpse of time, we must see technology as a geological process. After not even 5 years the average phone most of the time ends up in a waste disposal facility for electronic waste in for example Ghana or Pakistan (cf. Crawford, 2024, 39f.).
 {{IMG:rId84}}
Abb. 8: Disposal of waste in Ghana
Logistics behind AI
Since the elements which ultimately end up in IT equipment have passed through a large number of companies along the supply chain – from dozens of smelters who purchase their products from an unknown number of traders working with legal and illegal mines to thousands of component manufactures – , it is impossible to trace their origin, at least according to the manufacturer of the end product. The supply chain extends toward the capital, human work and resources of the world and demands a lot of them. The ignorance regarding the supply chain is a phenomenon inherent to capitalism, ranging from the way companies hide behind third-party providers and suppliers to the methods used to market and advertise goods to consumers. This is not only deniability, but also a form of self-deception and distancing (cf. Crawford, 2024, 42f.). 
Transporting minerals, fuel, hardware, labor and AI devices around the planet requires a global logistics infrastructure. For this logistics system, shipping containers are indispensable. These containers, made of carbon and steel, have seen explosive growth, transforming the planet into a single, massive factory with 3.1 % of annual global carbon dioxide emissions caused by cargo ships (as of 2021). In addition, containers are lost or fall overboard, which pollutes the environment even more. Also, the conditions faced by mariners leave little to be desired. Here, too, the most significant costs of global logistics are carried by the Earth’s atmosphere, the oceanic ecosystem, and low-wage workers. The picture that companies paint of artificial intelligence does not reflect the long-term costs, nor does it reflect the long history of the materials needed to build computing infrastructures, nor the energy required to operate them. Only by taking these hidden costs and these broader interconnections between stakeholders and systems into account can we understand what the shift toward increasing automation and usage of AI will mean. (cf. Crawford, 2024, 54f.).
 {{IMG:rId85}}
Abb. 9: Maritime transport CO² emissions for the World and OECD
[List Paragraph] consequences and challenges
sum-up:
There are as well advantages and possibilities for the environment by using AI as a tool, which may have come quite short in this project. But as we so often forget the consequences of our action in this fast-developing world, it was important for me to point out the global implications of this technological development and to trigger a reflection of our current trend. So, to sum it up:
Artifical intelligence is a bundle of technological processes that rely on industrial infrastructure, supply chains and human labor, all of which are located around the globe but are deliberately non- transparent in their interconnections. 
“We have seen how AI is much more than databases and algorithms, machine learning models and linear algebra. It is metamorphic: relying on manufacturing, transportation, and physical work; data centers and the undersea cables that trace lines between the continents; personal devices and their raw components; transmission signals passing through the air; datasets produced by scraping the internet; and continual computational cycles. These all come at a cost.” (Crawford, 2021, 48f.)
As the effects of human-induced climate change are already in full swing, it is crucial that we find new ways to understand the fundamentally material and human roots of AI systems. That, however, is easier said than done. Since AI builds upon topographies of extraction, Mazen Labban refers to it as a planetary mine. By this, Labban means that the planetary mine expands extraction and transforms it into new constellations by extending the familiar processes of mining to new spaces and interactions around the world. Besides, many industries that make up the chain leading to AI systems, obscure the ongoing costs of their operations. Furthermore, creating such systems is too complex, too heavily overlaid by intellectual property laws, and too deeply rooted in logistical and technical matters for us to fully grasp (cf. Crawford, 2024, 57). Even though there is a lack of regulations and critical reflection in regard of the unrestrained spreading of digital capitalism and the power concentrated in the hands of a few corporations, which can pose great danger by AI, drafting and implementing regulations proves difficult due to the concentration of power, technological exceptionalism and economic, legal and normative ambiguities. Yet for those least able to defend themselves, the material conditions of their existence are disregarded, whilst at the same time more information and resources are extracted from them. So, the logic and extractives power of this data colonialism must be challenged, just as systems that contribute to oppression can be rejected (cf. Crawford, 2024, 27). There is a need for digital sovereignty, digital literacy, technological education in schools and the integration of humanistic approaches into discourses on AI (cf. Rosengrün, 2024, 133-164). Not only because of the injustice in data use and the fact that data is becoming a resource, but also because of the instrumentalization of surveillance capitalism, which is used by tech determinism and fascism to dehumanize, influence market decisions and elections as well as contributing to a tradition of power and technology. As technology is shaping society, questions about regulation and freedom and defending liberal democracy rise as well as the need for activist resistance and grassroots initiatives, like GRADE which aims to build a robust and diverse network for a participatory technological agenda for Europe (cf. Grade).
“As conditions on Earth change, calls for data protection, labor rights, climate justice, and racial equity should be heard together. When these interconnected movements for justice inform how we understand artificial intelligence, different conceptions of planetary politics become possible.” (Crawford, 2021, 18)
Question in the middle:
Where is technological progress heading? Do we even want this development? And what obstacles and consequences lie ahead?
- Possibility of adding notes (thoughts) as a visitor of the website
[List Paragraph] sources and information
[List Paragraph] the two aspects (sources and information) as small bottoms to click on to get the information
Literature
Bergermann, U. (2010): „Das Planetarische. Vom Denken und Abbilden des ganzen Globus". In: U. Bergermann, I. Otto & G. Schabacher (Hg.). Das Planetarische. Kultur – Technik – Medien im postglobalen Zeitalter. München: Fink, S. 17–42. 
Costgrade. (o. D.). Costgrade. <https://costgrade.eu/> [abgerufen am 08.05.2026].
Crawford, K. (2021). The Atlas of AI: Power, Politics, and the Planetary Costs of Artificial Intelligence. Yale University Press. <https://doi.org/10.2307/j.ctv1ghv45t>.
Crawford, K. (2024). Atlas der KI: Die materielle Wahrheit hinter den neuen Datenimperien. (F. Lachmann, Übers.). München: C.H. Beck.
Deutsche Welle. (2023). Wie künstliche Intelligenz der Umwelt schadet. <https://www.dw.com/de/wie-k%C3%BCnstliche-intelligenz-der-umwelt-schadet/a-66305844> [abgerufen am 08.05.2026].
Deutsche Welle. (2023). Wie künstliche Intelligenz der Umwelt nutzt. <https://www.dw.com/de/wie-k%C3%BCnstliche-intelligenz-der-umwelt-nutzt/a-65400711> [abgerufen am 08.05.2026].
Gröger, J., et al. (2025). Umweltauswirkungen künstlicher Intelligenz. Greenpeace e.V.
Handelsblatt. (2023). Was das Silicon Valley besonders macht. <https://www.handelsblatt.com/politik/international/it-industrie-was-das-silicon-valley-besonders-macht-/26621932.html> [abgerufen am 08.05.2026].
Hanusch, F., Leggewie, C., Meyer, E. (2021). Planetar denken: Ein Einstieg. <10.14361/9783839453834>.
Konik, I., Agenonga, R., Ayiorwoth, G., & Musetta, A. (2025). Ecofeminist Revolutionary Struggles Amid Extractivist Conflicts in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Uganda. Capitalism Nature Socialism, 36(4), 139–161. <https://doi.org/10.1080/10455752.2025.2567586>.
Kox, T., Ullrich, A., & Zech, H. (2025). Uncertain journeys into digital futures: Inter- and transdisciplinary research for mitigating wicked societal and environmental problems. Nomos. < https://doi.org/10.5771/9783748947585>.
Mühlhoff, R. (2025). Künstliche Intelligenz und der neue Faschismus. Reclam.
Rosengrün, S. (2024). Künstliche Intelligenz zur Einführung (2., ergänzte Aufl.). Junius Verlag.
Schmidt, C. M. (Hrsg.). (2023). Digitainability: Digitale Schlüsseltechnologien für ökologisch nachhaltiges Wirtschaften: Marktpotenziale und strategische Implikationen (acatech STUDIE). <https://doi.org/10.48669/aca_2023-6>.
Yañez-Barnuevo, M. (2025). Data centers and water consumption. Environmental and Energy Study Institute (EESI). <https://www.eesi.org/articles/view/data-centers-and-water-consumption>
Zweig, K. (2023). Die KI war’s!: Von absurd bis tödlich – Die Tücken der künstlichen Intelligenz. Heyne.
Sources of the pictures
Abb. 1: Headquarters of Apple in the Silicon Valley, US
https://images.handelsblatt.com/xglOOQL8G5P1/cover/1400/933/0/0/1/0/0.5/0.5/apple-campus.avif
Abb. 2: Silver Peak mine in Nevada, US
https://www.albemarle.com/sites/default/files/styles/16_9_xs_2x/public/2024-12/albemarl-silver-peak-hero_0.jpg.webp?itok=PCMdK0hh
Abb. 3: Lithium reserves concentrated in the Uyuni salt flats, Bolovia
https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2025/sep/03/lithium-mining-bolivia-salt-flats-indigenous-environment-ecosystem - img-2
Abb. 4: Cobalt and copper mine in Kolwezi, Democractic Republic of Congo
https://cdn.dailymaverick.co.za/i/AnAN4mwltjIMmWabN_shgYABjaM=/1200x0/smart/filters:strip_exif()/file/attachments/orphans/GettyImages-2218629831_248120.jpg
Abb. 5: Black sludge pours into the lake in Batau, Mongolia
https://ichef.bbci.co.uk/images/ic/1024xn/p02n9y28.jpg.webp
Abb. 6: A sea tin miner in Bangka, Indonesia
https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2012/nov/23/tin-mining-indonesia-bangka 
Abb. 7: The NSA Data Center in Utah, US
https://www.theatlantic.com/technology/archive/2015/11/a-visit-to-the-nsas-data-center-in-utah/416691/
Abb. 8: Disposal of waste in Ghana
https://cdn.prod.www.spiegel.de/images/17f0e2ab-caf4-476f-a150-6475a85bbd8e_w920_r1.6941176470588235_fpx70.21_fpy54.95.webp
Abb. 9: Maritime transport CO2 emissions for the World and OECD
https://www.oecd.org/en/data/datasets/maritime-transport-co2-emissions.html 
Info about the project
The project “The extractive logic of AI – the tension between artificial intelligence and the environment” is the result of a Research Colloquium I attended last semester (2025/26) at the University of Hamburg. The class was part of my degree in Liberal Arts and Sciences and focused on socio-political reflections on digitalisation and artificial intelligence. As climate change is also a topic covered in our lectures, I wanted to combine these two relevant aspects of our modern world and examine the impact of the current technological development on the environment. Therefore, I drew on the first chapter “earth” of Kate Crawfords book “Atlas of AI. Power, Politics, and the Planetary Costs of Artificial Intelligence” as the primary inspiration and source for this project, as in it she illustrates the power and logic of extractions of AI in a multilayered way. Ironically, I used some AI tools (Claude and deepL) to help me programme the website/ virtual exhibition as well as for some translations. Thank you for visiting my website.